This is the Peeps building.
And can I have your full name, Doctor, so I can just... It's Richard Lockett.
And that's L-U-C-K-E-T-T.
And you are the librarian director?
Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
So, here we are.
You can talk to me a little bit about the library if you'd like.
You said you were going to start.
Oh, no, I only said I thought we'd better start here.
Okay.
Because there's somewhere to sit down.
These are my rooms.
We'll go next door to the library in a few minutes.
But I think it's up to you to ask the question.
Okay.
Well, needless to say that the Peeps Library for me is of great interest.
And it just became even sharpened more yesterday when I went up to Oxford and went to Duke Humphrey's library.
It's a beautiful structure, a beautiful building, but only three of his books are available.
The great point about Beats Library is that there are nobody else's books but his, books of his.
That's one of the threads that runs through my study, is that you do have collectors.
Beats was a collector, book people, book collectors.
who, through whatever, you can call them idiosyncrasies or anything you want, but are, they have been responsible for the preservation of knowledge and things.
And as I understand it, there are unique items in the Peaks Library, is that correct?
Yes, well obviously every manuscript is unique.
But there are a number, a great number of things in which we have what appear to be the only known copies
I never, in fact, say unique.
I always say own and own copy, because... That's good.
I like that phrase.
You never know what may turn up.
Uh-huh.
Well, I know that as a writer, whenever I use the word unique, I say the never before that has happened.
You know, inevitably, someone comes forward to prove you incorrect.
That's the case.
I think I want to...
One wants immediately to qualify the sense in which, or to expand perhaps, the sense in which Pepys could be called a book collector.
He was a collector of books, and I suppose you can also say that he was a bibliophile, but he doesn't at all accord with modern inspirations of bibliography.
And of course, Pepys is three people.
You've got, as it were, to the bottom of the mound.
Most people, I think, stop with Pepys as a diarist.
That's why I'm penetrating to the bottom of the mound.
Though one of the extraordinary things about it, which immediately runs as a kind of thread through the strata, is that the diary is in the library.
And is virtually the only
personal thing in fact it is the only personal thing in the library the only thing of peeps's personal papers went elsewhere in fact most of them were in bodily but the diary he put in the library i'll show you in a moment that's wonderful uh then the second peeps if you take the first peeps who is of course peeps not known to any of his contemporaries in disguise the second peeps uh is peeps a civil servant
which is how he was known to his contemporaries, primarily.
And it was really only the last 12 years of his life that he was thought of chiefly as a virtuoso, because by that time, as a result of his revolution, he had left office.
So, Pepys, the civil servant, the man who invented many of the structures which still govern
and regulated bureaucracy in this country.
The man who actually invented some of the structures which the Lieutenant North Company, post the Secretary of the Navy, was created by Peeps to regularize naval administration in this country, and then taken over after the revolution in sex.
In fact, I once had a visit from John Lemmon,
when he was Secretary of the Navy, he wanted to see what his predecessor had been after.
I thought that was actually a lot of writing.
So that's the second Pepys.
And then the third Pepys is Pepys, the book collector.
The book man, whatever we want to call him.
And yet, as we'll see, his book collective
was a very, very functional thing, and defined within, by certain rigid precepts, which are not those that you'd expect from a book chapter today, or from most pet music books, though perhaps unwittingly he was moving towards
the kind of values that all modern book collecting.
He certainly had a sense of the value of his library.
You don't even have to call it a collection.
When I say I'm writing about book collectors, that is vague.
I'm really not.
No people who collect books.
The trouble is the term has got subverted in a way.
I'm using it really, I'm not writing about book collecting, I'm writing about people.
who have been obsessed even with books, and do you think that Pepys was an obsessive fulfillment of his books?
Certainly, the codicil that set out his library, which is delightful, I certainly have to feel that he took this exceedingly seriously.
He took it very seriously, but he's not obsessive about books in any sense which is distinct from that in which he was
the way in which he was obsessive about other things.
The diary.
I mean, one has to be very cautious of this word, the word obsessive, which I think possibly has stronger connotations in English and English than it does in American English.
Well, Paul Freud certainly.
Yes.
You see, he was all his life concerned with neatness and regularity, with getting things tied up, whether it's his diary in which he
doesn't miss an entry, in which you think about it, he very oddly reports, I'm so glad that he did get to the end of the day.
His diary which is meticulously, and which has continuous run actually, of course not a run to the period in which he was most influential.
that during the time he was making his career.
Do you think that he didn't do it, or that one doesn't exist?
Oh, yeah, that it disappeared.
We know it doesn't exist, because he stopped, because his eyes were failing.
He thought his eyes were failing.
So he stopped and reported that he was stopping?
Yes, of course he stopped.
But he is stopping.
Of course, why?
It's because of writing at night, candlelight, terrified about his eyes.
Let me interrupt just for a second.
I wonder why he sent the personal papers to Oxford
and really kept the diary here.
Well, the diary... Because he wanted everything neat, so this does raise that question.
Yes, he wanted everything neat, whether it was for the fact that he wanted the Navy neat.
And the Navy was neat.
And he got it and made the Navy neat.
I'm a former naval officer myself, so I know the... Yes, well, the Navy wasn't neat when Pepys came here.
The British Navy was a shambles.
And he regularized procedures for commissions.
He was the first person to...
He introduced the rule by which at the end of every commission, the vessel's log was deposited at the Admiralty.
Which continues to this day.
Yes.
And that was Peeps' idea.
That was a brilliant idea.
You have a record of everything, and it's there.
And if you change something, you just run a line.
I mean, I used to have to make log entries.
You never blot out a line, just a word.
You went a line for it.
So we can see what the mistake was, or what the original thought was, so it's all there.
Also, you say his diary is quite neat.
Did he ever blot a line?
Or do you think if there was a blotted line, he would... There are a few, but very, very few in a million and a half words.
It must have really aggravated him to have to blot a line.
I don't think he liked it at all.
But anyway, to go back to your main point, the point about assertiveness, no, he was meticulously neat in everything that he did.
And you can read about it in the diary when he's setting his house in order.
He liked things to be just so, precise.
And this was something that didn't diminish as he got older.
He was very much concerned about the fate of books, which he had every reason to read.
Many private collections in his time, such as there were, were in chaos.
Charles II's library, from which a number of books found their way into Pepys's, was notoriously in chaos.
Does he so state this in a diary, by the way?
No, we know about Charles II's library from Evelyn's diary.
I mean, does he so state about his concern for the state of books in the library?
No, because, of course, you see, he stopped writing the diary in 1669.
He dies in 1703.
Well, in 1666, he has had his first bookcase made.
And the making of this is reported in the diary, 23rd July.
23 July 1666.
he has his first bookcase made and the reason why he has his bookcase made is because his books are mainly on chairs and when he needs to look at a book which is at the bottom of a heap of books he finds he's not doing so because it's too much of an effort to move the books on top in order to open the book underneath and so he got in a man called Thomas Simpson
with a Y, who was, he calls him Simpson rejoiner.
In fact, he was a Deptford shipwright.
That's crazy.
And with him, he does what he calls contriving.
He sets about contriving of the press to put up my books in.
And this word contriving, I think, is used in his full 17th century sense because
They are the earliest freestanding glass-fronted bookcases known.
I wonder why they're called Peeps bookcases, or are they?
Well, sometimes an auctioneer's jargon, because they continue to be copied right into the 19th century.
And other English 17th century glass-fronted bookcases, open bookcases, are all copies of Peeps's.
You can go to Durham Park, that's G-Y-R-H-A-M,
Durham Park in Gloucestershire, which was the home of Thomas Blathwaite, B-L-A-T-H-W-A-Y-T.
He was the paymaster of the army, a very rich man, post a little bit similar, I suppose, to Pepys'.
But he was a great, unlike Pepys, he was a great peculator.
he amassed an enormous fortune.
And he spent this on building a house, but his bookcases, the library itself is the last, not intact, but the bookcases are.
His bookcases are copies of peeps.
And indeed New York, about 18 months ago, a couple of early 19th century bookcases were sold which were copies of peeps.
And I'll see some of these in there.
Yes.
That's wonderful.
To pick up the thread.
Well, I hadn't asked your questions about unique items.
Yes, there are a lot of only known copies.
And in particular, one finds only known copies amongst the ephemera, the collection of ballads.
the 1250 ballads, single sheet ballads, on which maybe 700 are the only copies.
And in the other thing which people, which we can't display, people don't really get to see, which is his selection prints.
He had 10,500 prints.
Enormous selection prints.
Contemporary prints to him?
some are contemporary some go back to the very dawn of print making i mean yes but he was a connoisseur can you say that oh very much so yes i i i prefer the word virtuoso because that would have been the contemporary okay as an educator sir what is your specialty it's with uh i wonder you're doing them
I wonder if you could tell me what you teach.
Well, I don't really kind of, I don't really fit into the conventional things.
I mean, the Beeps Librarianship is a part-time job.
It's not an entirely happy situation.
I earn my living by teaching, by lecturing in the university.
I lecture in English literature, and over a really wide range, because that's .
Obviously, I tend to gravitate towards 17th century.
but I think I've only ever once given them, once in my whole life, given Electron Peeps.
So my teaching is just not related to my job as librarian at all.
No, this was just for my own... Yes, and in fact, my main field of research is, and this is just to confuse matters further, is musicals.
Oxford just yesterday got a great music collection, by the way.
Oh, in Bodley, in Bodley?
In Bodley, yes.
Yes, it used, of course, to be the Oxford Music Schools Collection.
But they just announced yesterday a major acquisition.
Oh, is it from Chicago?
I do not believe so.
I heard Chicago mentioned yesterday.
I wasn't around for the announcement that this was about to happen, and they gave me some press releases, not press releases, but some literature, which I took, and I haven't had a chance to examine yet.
Because I didn't realize it would be pertinent today.
Yes, well, of course, Pepys has a lot of music because music was his great private passion.
I'm sorry, he reports in the diary about going to wonderful concerts.
Well, he was a player, of course.
I think you should look.
Have you looked at the big edition of the diary by Leighton?
Not the big one.
I have the shorter Pepys.
Yes.
Because there's an enormous amount of valuable information in the companion volume, volume 10.
Volume 10 is rather curiously organized because it's simply alphabetically organized.
But you can read about, I mean it's got articles on books in the diary period.
The library, as such, didn't exist in the diary.
But I think the easiest thing is if we go and have a look at it, and then... Yes, we can do it now.
Because, of course, the date on the outside of the building... Is neither the date of the building, nor the date of Pepys' death, but the date when the library came here.
Because it became, after Pepys' death, it became a usufract.
in the hands of his nephew.
What do we call it?
Usufract, that's when something is a lifetime.
Okay.
Could you spell that for me?
U-S-E-U-F-R-A-C-T.
Okay.
That's a new word for me.
But it's a word which is loyal.
I do have an O-E-D at home, so I'm sure it's there.
Do you want the store closer?
Ah, yes, please.
The building.
What you see, the facade of the Poiseuille, is probably about 1670.
And it actually contributed towards the embellishment of France.
Look at that old padlock there.
Now, is that locked contemporary?
No.
As this is.
This board is steel.
How old would you say that lock is?
Oh, that's modern, but this lock is much older.
Now, if I actually would probably, if you'd just hang on, I'd be able to stay here for a second, because
Oh, yes.
The alarm's on.
The outer steel door.
The inner door.
He's opening.
Unlocking the third door.
And the alarms are on.
There.
Can I enter now?
Yes.
Will I be able to take some of these?
Yes, cool.
Oh, wow.
Oh, this is just wonderful.
I didn't bother to take my camera in quarters, but I didn't really think that would be over.
I didn't bother to take my camera.
Well, actually, the problem about that, we don't allow... That's fine.
I sense that.
And there's a practical reason, but it's not quite difficult.
It's because...
We have a photographer who is wonderful.
And you have some pictures of that.
And he has no, yes.
And he can take them.
But we don't pay him.
He does it really for the fun of it.
That's great.
If there are some pictures, just so I can, when it comes to help me in my writing.
But anyway, let's not even think about that for the moment, let's.
This portrait of Thomas Hill.
The pictures don't make very much sense.
That little picture over there, the seascape, belonged to Pepys.
Pepys had collection pictures, had 65 pictures, but they didn't come to the college, and the collection was dispersed in the 18th century.
That was given to the college by somebody who bought it and recognised what it was, which I thought was very, well, given to the library, not the college.
Very perceptive.
Because the library isn't really part of the college.
The library is not part of the college.
Well, I am, the Pepys I've earned is appointed by the masterman, if it's possible, to the master, not the felix.
I see.
These were extracted from the front of the catalogue.
I'll show you the catalogue in that one.
Is this something I can purchase, by the way, as a catalogue?
Oh, well, yeah.
Yes, you have to have a small fortune to do so.
I'll show you that again.
But this is Pepys' own catalogue.
I'm sorry.
We're talking about... These were the frontest pieces to Pepys' catalogue dated 1693.
These are two illustrations of the library in Pepys' House, York Buildings, now Buckingham Street, Westminster.
Yes.
So you see, there are two views.
Buckingham Street, Westminster is just by where Charing Cross Station is.
And the facade of the house still exists.
Really?
But nothing behind the facade.
It's great pity.
You can see there's the Thames just outside his windows.
And these were his lodgings as secretary of the admiralty.
He never lived in a house of his own.
his life which is very interesting in relation to the amount of money that he spent on the library and this is how it was set up in 1693 and at this time you can see he had seven bookcases and at the end of his life ten years later he had twelve so there's this process of growth in the library which i can demonstrate to you in a moment but anyway you'll see that the organization of the library
Here is a little bit reminiscent of the way in which we have it.
It looks pretty close, actually, when it's set up.
In here, the bookcase is all pieces, and the numbers are, so far as we know, in the order of their construction.
The desk is the final bookcase because it houses the oversized books.
There are other pieces of 17-centred furniture, but they have no connection with Beeps.
Okay.
So you can see how it was with... But this is not the desk.
That is a table with a card on it, which was how they used copies then.
And you can see, again, the tremendous weakness of it.
The desk is... Now, this was his working desk?
No.
Well, not as far as I know.
Obviously, Saruman's mind is involved.
But it must have been made after 1693, and originally it had a drawer under here, which would have made it very difficult to work at.
Somebody's taken that drawer out.
I'm just looking at the title of some of these enormous books, Great Britain's Coasting Pilots.
He had a huge collection of maps that you would expect.
And we've got separate law on the maps.
Now, this... By the way, this quotation here, a private library wrote Peeps should comprehend, quote, in fewest books and least room the greatest diversity of subjects, styles, that's S-T-I-L-E-S, and languages its owners' reading will bear.
close quote.
Is this replicated in one of the publications that I will do?
Yes, it is.
Okay, great.
Yes, that was at the end of his life.
He tried to write a memorandum really to himself.
And it's most uncharacteristic of Peter's writing because there are lots of crossings out there when he was trying to formulate exactly what this library was.
And in fact, he starts off by a long list of things that this library was not.
It was not a public library in a university.
It was not
a library, the library of a professor in the university.
It was a private library, a kind of showing off.
And I think that this is most apparent.
You may have, when you were looking at the Roussard, you would have seen on the front Bibliotheca of Portiana.
And then you would have seen Peake's library motto,
That's his.
I was going to ask you what that was.
I wrote it down, but at one point I... Well, it's a quotation from Cicero's Republic, and it means, I suppose, in my translation, it's difficult to translate, it's very contracted Latin, is the mind of each.
That is what each man is.
You see, and every book has his book plate in it, with his portrait by Nella.
How do we spell Nella?
K-N-E-L-L-E-R.
Okay.
Engraved by Richard White.
But what it in fact says, I mean, there is Mr. Peebs, pretty solemnly.
What it says, mind of each, that is what each man is.
In effect, it says this is not, this is not Mr. Peebs, but this and this.
Mr. Peter's wonderful.
And each book also has a different book page at the end.
Those are the fouled anchors of the admiralty, that's the insignia of the admiralty.
But again, the motto.
How do we say it again?
Mens quiusqui, ises quiusqui.
Wonderful.
It's very good.
Now, this is where the diary is.
First of all... Is this so far as you can ascertain the precise manner in which he... Oh, yes, yes, yes, they must be, because they're all arranged by height.
So it's... I'll show you in a minute.
Okay.
To take it... Now, this is bookcase number one.
Okay, you must point out to me why they are not arranged in a strictly chronological order, and some of them are numbered ones.
Well, they go around in a circle.
I see.
And the books go around in a circle, but I'll explain that in a second.
Okay, just hold on, and we'll get there.
Now, you'll see that the, actually, though they look the same, there are changes.
You can see it's most dramatically.
Now, carrying handles, that's important, because you see peeps living in lodgings, so the bookcases break down.
This comes off that, the cornice comes off,
And the whole thing becomes perfectly... The work, the woodwork is quite exciting.
Yes, we'll come to that in a second.
So you've got the carrying handles, and eventually, of course, they were all brought up from London in 1724.
But you'll see that there are differences.
I mean, it's very obvious there.
Iron handle, and then a brass handle on the last ones.
An iron handle on one, and a... Brass handle on the other.
So there are tiny differences between each pair of bookcases.
This is quite deliberate, of course.
No, because people died, you know, as a book finder.
Now, the most dramatic difference, and the importance of this will come here, is that if you look, this bookcase was originally adjustable, kind of practical.
By number one we're talking about.
Yes, you might get today.
Right.
Number 12 has never been adjustable.
The shelves are fixed.
The shelves are while fixed there, but that was done later on.
What do you think keeps discerned along the way?
Well, sorry, but if you let me follow through my thread, then you can ask, I think, questions about it easier.
Right.
When he started, he started with what we would think today as a practical domestic bookcase, one in which you can adjust the shelves or the various types of books you've got.
Eventually, he saw that this was not going to work, and that in order to get the maximum number of books into the smallest place, he was going to arrange them by height.
And so all the books are arranged by height, and you can see that by the end of his collecting, this would become a policy.
And so the last bookcases don't have adjustable shelves.
So the subject is quite irrelevant.
No, quite irrelevant.
The consequences of this, I'll explain in a moment.
um now the carving you noted well the wood oak oddly enough it's not the fashionable wood at the time oak was going out walnut would have been the fashionable wood but oak was the wood that you got in dockyards so and thomas simpson was a lot of yard joiner yeah well there's also a question of dockyard oak and navy board time
And the carving rather puzzles some furniture historians.
In fact, it's much more like the kind of carving that you would have got on the stone galleries of ships.
So it's an adaptation.
How would you describe the carving?
I mean, is that the description?
The technical term is gadrooning.
Gadrooning.
G-A-D-R-O-N-I-N-G.
And these are on the cornices.
And what do we call this part of the bookcase down below?
Just above?
Top of the plinth, yes.
Top of the plinth.
Why not?
And do you think that the same person did these seals, that number of the cases?
Cartouches?
Difficult to say.
Yes, I mean, I think that those cartouches are contemporary.
Cartouches with numbers designating each book.
Yes, that's right.
And they are red with the gold.
I'm just describing it.
Great, you continue, sir.
Well, just to get the diary out of the way, there's no secret about the diary.
Here it is in bookcase number one, and you can see it through the glass, and it's called journal rather than diary on the labels.
Volumes one and two are in a showcase.
So here it is, entered into the library as any other book.
Thank you.
That's fine.
I just touched volume one.
And you see its extraordinary neatness.
And it's in shorthand, not in code.
The shorthand means that many words are in longhand, either because they were proper names, because it was not a phonetic shorthand, or because he'd forgotten the shorthand.
And it was a shorthand which people in his office could read.
They could?
Yes.
so so this is kind of a myth that has grown up it's a bit it's a workable shorthand um which uh
And yet while they understood it, it still took a century itself for it to be deciphered.
Well, what had happened was that obviously the people didn't publish diaries much in the century after Pepe's death.
And what happened was that the shorthand became superseded by other shorthands.
And it was his own, so therefore.
No, it wasn't his own.
It was standard shorthand.
Oh, this was a standard shorthand.
The standard shorthand is called Shelton's Tachigraphy.
Shelton's Tachigraphy.
T-A-C-H.
But again, you can find this in any piece.
I'm just looking at where the diary is housed, the shelves.
There is another shelf just in the rear section of the book.
Well, we're double banking because these are quartos.
They need to be up, otherwise it would be very inconvenient.
He did the double banking, or he did the double banking?
You meaning his... Well, he employed a library clock.
I mean, the system is this.
The system is this?
Yes.
But he employed a library clock.
He had two people in his household, which was a very modest household after his wife's death.
Two people he wouldn't expect to find.
He employed a domestic musician...
Cesare Morelli, who was actually, despite his name, Fleming, and who stayed with him for 30 years.
And he employed, latterly, we don't know when he came into Pepys' employment, a library clerk, who was responsible for doing all of the clerical work, some of the scribal work connected with the library, and there was a great deal of it.
Now, the point of that arrangement, if you arrange by height,
then everything works in the catalogue.
If you arrange by height and you buy more books and have to add more presses, and originally he thought that the whole thing could be contained in two book presses, in the diary when he begins to think about making a library, the whole thing could be contained in two.
Every time you have to add a press, the whole thing has to be reorganised, the whole system.
So you can tell how long a book has been in the library, roughly, by the number of numbers that it's had.
This is in his hand, in a way.
Well, it's impossible to say with 17th century hands, and particularly with numbers.
And Pete wrote three completely different hands, depending on whether he was doing official correspondence, private work, which he wanted to be tidy.
Clearly identifiable as his, though, in each case?
oh no i mean if you say that yeah i mean it's just a question i wouldn't know enough you couldn't tell on that really for anybody okay and that's really nice when you've got a page of it yes of course um but people are frightfully um assertive about this and you can all you can do is demonstrate the wrong so the library this the diary was in the library and regarded as a book rather than a private paper
for a long, long time, you see.
That's about as many... Well, there are the numbers, 720, 721, each scratch dial, 885, 962, 1053.
And then the final number from the last regulation of the library.
So the final number... Which is 1837.
Yes.
The final number is in red, and would not have been put in by Pepys, nor by his library clerk, but by his heir, John Jackson, who had the job of
of putting things into are these are these bindings in which the books were issued or did peeps bind them we don't know no no we know a lot about it there is actually a catalog simply of the bindings in the library a modern catalog because it's the greatest repertoire of information on 17th century this is yes where we stand yes um so there is a catalog by hartnick's
of the bindings alone.
In general, in general, Pepys had books bound for him.
If they were new books, he would have bought them unbound, of course, with maybe two or three exceptions of text.
in the 17th century, occasionally textbooks were sold bound.
And just very occasionally, there's not a copy in the library, very occasionally when a publisher recognised the best seller, he sold it bound.
So the publisher of Pilgrim's Progress recognised what he'd got, printed 4,000, which was a huge print order in those days, and issued it bound.
Occasionally, Pepys bought a book
in a binding and didn't change it.
For example, most, but not all, of the vellum bindings would have been born like that.
But in general, he had books found, and he kept to really three basic standards for ordinary-sized books.
Go ahead.
I'm just taking notes as you speak.
And I'm listening.
And the way that the books are arranged numerically, they go round the entire library in sequence.
So number one is actually in a book, in a showcase at the moment.
But number one is there.
And so it goes one right round, the same level, the whole way around the library.
Amazing.
And then it goes there, there, there, there, there.
and then down to the bottom for the lard.
How would you describe this aroma, which is wonderful?
It's more than lively, it's leather?
Leather, it's the wax that we use on the leather.
Wonderful.
And it's partly, there are cedar wood linings on the sides of the bookcases.
It's partly that.
How many titles are there?
Not titles, but how many volumes would you say there are in the library?
Well, there should be 3,000 books, but seven are missing.
Oh, my God.
That's not titles.
Now, of the seven missing, four or five probably were never put into the library.
We haven't lost any books in this century.
And so there are perhaps three lost.
There are perhaps three lost.
And do we know what they are?
Well, we have a list of the missing books, but we don't know which ones really went missing, which ones Jackson, Peeps's heir, didn't actually finally put into the library.
I suspect because they were on loan when Peeps died.
Peeps himself lent books.
We do know.
If it were possible to acquire these titles, do you think the library would acquire them and add them to the collection?
It would restore them to the collection.
Restore them.
They wouldn't be the titles.
They'd have to be... The actual volume.
And I should say that there's a puzzle about this.
Every so often, we do get excited book dealers saying that they've got... The Lost.
A Peeps... Well, no, they don't know what the titles are.
They've got a Peeps library book.
And indeed, they have.
But it was a book which probably will be a book that Peeps threw out the library.
Because he was extremely selective.
Wouldn't you like a book that he threw out?
Yes, but of course we can't add it to the Pepe's Library, because the whole reason why what makes the Pepe's Library so extraordinary is not the stipulation that it should not be subtracted from, but the stipulation that it should not be added to.
Wonderful.
But you could always add it to an annex.
Well, we have had this difficulty.
Because I would think that you'd like to have it as a 12th century scholar.
Of course not.
No, of course it would.
But you can't have it in here, in this room.
No, and also we have no thumbs.
That's another story.
I mean, we do literally have no thumbs.
Here is the nearest we have got to that.
Now, this is Caxton's translation of Hovid.
Now, Pepys owned books 10 to 15, it's Metamorphoses.
Which we are looking at here.
Yes.
So this is Pepys.
And it was thought that these were the only surviving books.
Now, this is Caxton's translation of Ovid, which he never printed.
And people misunderstand the situation about Caxton.
They don't realize that his main business was running a scriptorium, and that printing was really the cheap end, and that Caxton's main patrons would have bought manuscripts, not printed books.
So he translated the Metamorphoses, but he never got around to printing it.
Now, it was always assumed that this in the Peeps was all that survived.
And indeed, in 1924, the Shakespeare head press printed an edition of it.
But about 25 years ago, somebody came into Sotheby's with books one to nine.
Wasn't this from the Phillips?
It's from the Phillips text, yes.
That was the one found in the pile, the celebrated.
Yes.
This is the copy.
But of course, it had passed out of the Robinson's hands before it went to Sotheby's, I believe.
And that's it, yes.
How did it, if you have no money, how did you manage to get something that was such extraordinary?
Well, partly because a benefactor, Eugene Power of Michigan, really came up with a very large sum of money.
How do we spell that name?
Power, P-A-W-E-R.
Eugene Power of Michigan.
Partly because we published a facsimile edition, and old members of the college bought it, and in doing so were making a large donation.
And partly because the London book trade, and I doubt that they'll do it now, kept out of the bidding.
Very noble.
Yes.
Wonderful.
Even certain strained resources, but you'll see, this is how it was done.
This is a unique copy here.
Oh, well, I mean, all manuscripts are really unique.
But, right.
But it was resumed before, and Caxton never translated this.
I'm sorry, Caxton never printed this.
He translated it, he never printed it, and so far as is known, there was never another manuscript version.
And here it is.
Yes.
Who did the illumination there, I wonder?
Oh, he's always called the Caxton Master.
It's very convenient.
Good.
So we call this Caxton M.S., from his scriptorium, and his translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses,
Books 1 through 9, acquired in 1970, mainly through the generosity of Mr. E.B.
Power, Honorary Fellow of the College.
And as you have just said here, this translation of Ovid's Minimal.
See, I heard about this.
I didn't realize it was here, from a French version by Caxton in 1480.
Pepys bought only part of the manuscript.
The other part, which had been supposed lost, was discovered in 1964 as loose sheets among the remains of the collection left by the famous Victorian bibliophiles, Sir Thomas Thorpe's.
Mayor, do you mind if I do this?
In 1966, it was sold to a New York bookseller itself, please, but the government placed a moratorium on its export, and the college was enabled to buy it by funds raised especially for the purpose.
The sum was provided partly by public subscription and partly by the sale of a facsimile addition, but principally by the munificence of Mr. Eugene Power of Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Pepys will forbade additions to his library.
The first part has therefore been catalogued in the old library but placed here on loan by the master of fellows.
Thank you.
That's really extraordinary.
I should explain that there are three libraries in the college.
There is the college undergraduate library, the old library, which is the college's collection of books before 1875, and virtually every ancient campus college has a similar library.
In fact, the old library is overshadowed by the Peeps, almost unfairly, because it's a remarkable collection.
And we've also got a lot of the, we've got a good little bottom of the material, including manuscripts of three of Eliot's four quartets, and right through from manuscript to proof stage.
So that is an old library book.
I should point out also that you have these two Paxton manuscripts
in a case beneath those two that you mentioned to me earlier.
You mentioned the point about the books at the back being on an elevated shelf.
Well, there's one place in the organization of the library where the system broke down.
Is that okay there, by the way?
Yes.
Okay.
And that's... I'm sorry.
That is it.
Okay.
Isn't that extraordinary?
How did that happen?
Well, you didn't... I'm sorry, it took me a second to think it would be just in there.
Right, that is... He built up these little feet.
Well, it only happened that one day.
Obviously, much to his mind, the publishers changed the run of books.
The publishers changed the design.
So he had to solve this problem, which he solved in this way, by putting little stills, which, well, no, I don't have to say that as a word.
I mean, I have no idea what.
He put these little blocks, which he killed, you know, there are more.
You see, it's there.
One, two, three, four.
He must have been vexed.
Very nice.
Oh, that's wonderful.
In general, well, this is one instance.
You can see everything is kept exactly as much.
Here we have a book which we have had to put into a slip case.
This is an example of this book.
One of the few examples where Pete, that's actually put an elaborate binding on a book,
There are books with very elaborate bindings, and you can see them here.
But books in very elaborate bindings, on the whole, were given to each dedication copy.
Ah, yes.
That's interesting, because the purchase of that book is described in the diary.
And that's how we know that he bought it for the sake of the binding.
Bought by Pepys in 1660 at the Hague, quote, for love of the binding, close quote.
That's from the diary.
Thomas Farnaby's index was horrific.
Very interesting.
That binding, yes.
Yes, that's Newhouse's whole art of navigation, dedicated to Pepys.
And that copy was presented to him.
That's a presentation copy?
Yes.
London, 1685.
APL 1863.
I'm sure Harvard, where I'm doing most of my archival research has... Well, it'll have the binding catalog.
But this is one of the few books on which Peeps put an elaborate binding.
And this is New Testament by Wycliffe.
Wycliffe's translation of the New Testament.
When you look at it, you can see, again, you can see that it isn't right at the time.
It's not right at the time.
is bound by Richard Mierne.
How do we spell?
M-E-A-R-N-E.
It's extraordinary.
Oh, look at that.
It's breathtaking, isn't it?
And it's a wonderful manuscript because most manuscripts, or many manuscripts, disintegrate as you get to the end.
They get more callous.
But actually, it continues in the same quality.
This is paper.
No.
That's not vellum.
That is vellum.
Very, very fine vellum.
How many lines?
I don't know.
I've never found it.
It'll be to a standard of four, actually.
Extraordinary.
Thirty.
This is an exceedingly rare book in its own right.
Oh, yes, it is.
And it's an interesting book as well, because it gives a lie to the notion that Wycliffe's was a Lollard's Bible, and that the Lollard's, or rather, it gives a notion to the idea that the purpose of Wycliffe's translation was to, or the primary purpose, was to bring the vernacular version to the poem, because this is an immensely expensive manuscript.
Well, just look at the illuminations here, the gold and the
I will have to believe that this was an eminent artist of the period.
Yes, it is.
And what is the date of this?
Well, it's about 1340.
1340.
And Pepys acquired it about when, I wonder?
We don't know.
You can make a guess.
I know.
You see, in this instance, you'd love to have it in its original binding, of course, if such a creature exists.
Well, I don't think such a creature does exist.
That's MS 2073, Wycliffe Bible.
Probably the oldest.
The oldest binding in the vibrant.
That is in number eight.
English binding.
In the back of number eight, which is amazing.
You'd almost think that that would have quite a place, wouldn't you?
This is the oldest binding, I suppose.
The oldest English binding in the Bible.
I don't know.
But this is a
This was, this is a book of ours, and a calendar.
It almost looks like a canteen, doesn't it?
And it was used, I mean, it was used, it's from Durham.
Now I'm not going to try and pull it out, I'm afraid, because it's, but essentially, it's not, but it comes out, and it then unfolds.
And this would have had, you can just see the top of it, a thong, and it was carried by a cleric, um,
drawing a picture attached to the cord of a cassock what do we call it what do you think um a portable yes um but i mean there is one but i mean nick's the thing is checking nick's that's fine so you said it's probably the oldest mining although the oldest the oldest
Yeah, the oldest English rhyming.
It's late 15th century.
And look, there is some really very fine tool in there.
Yes, there is.
What does it contain, did you say?
It contains a calendar, a devotionary calendar.
But on the whole, early themes were of course rebounded by Peeps, just as he rebounded or banned.
I mean, they may not have been in bindings.
We've just said one of the things that Peeps was a pioneer of was ways of keeping books.
I said earlier that apparently content was irrelevant to the scheme.
Subject.
Categorisation by subject is present in the catalogue, not in the physical arrangements of books on the shelves.
A modern computer-generated library, one of those libraries where you press a button and a book comes out of a shelf.
Sorry, a book comes out of a chute.
is arranged on this principle to get the maximum number of books into the smallest place.
This is the catalogue, in fact,
Our main catalogue is not here at the moment because it's been photographed for a facsimile.
Now, books don't leave the room, we never lend, but actually the catalogues, though drawn up to Peep's specifications, aren't actually library books.
Do you follow me?
Books never leave the room and you never lend.
Have there at least been facsimiles?
Are photocopies made of the unique items in particular?
Well, when we get an order to do it, we keep one for ourselves.
But having no funds, we... Obviously, the real box, it's a diary we've got.
That is a worthwhile project that some benefactor should underwrite, I would think.
Wouldn't you think so?
Yes, but of course, we don't know exactly what is unique.
And we are gradually working that way, but it has to be a slow process.
Now, it's unfortunate that the main volume of the catalogue isn't here because that does show you very clearly
how meticulously organized it is but it's organized both by author and by subject um and the arrangement when you've got all three volumes of the cataloging play
This is his catwalk.
It almost looks like a tree then, a family tree.
So when you look something up, the main volume isn't here, because it's being photographed at the University Library.
But when you look something up, I mean, it's a pity I just can't demonstrate, and this is because we're closed, and that's why I was having it first for us, we were closed.
But you look up the subject, you think of the subject, you look it up,
And books are often entered in two or three ways, so that you can't miss it.
And there are cross-references, you see, are very thorough.
So sea matters, sea war, actually, and it takes you to history under sea.
That meaning not history under the sea, but history, look under sea, the history of the sea.
Miscellany of Matters Naval, these are professional papers, which he did keep in the library.
Navy Royal, then look under sea.
Let me just draw a little picture of this, if you don't mind.
That is something that I'll hear it, but I think it will help if I can have a visual image.
And this is his system again?
Yes.
It's very clever, then.
It looks quite functional, too, doesn't it?
Of course it's functional.
The man who ran the Navy didn't organize a library on some kind of ludicrous principle to mystify people.
It's absolutely clear.
And everything is systematic.
So in his collection of prints, well, I hardly dare start getting into this because it would take ages to explain, but in his system of prints,
Prints are arranged on an art memory principle and on a cosmological principle.
Just knowing that is wonderful.
So what you do is you look up a subject.
You can't do it now because this is the appendix.
These are the things that work.
You look up a subject.
This gives you the idea of what a main catalog is like.
This is really all I need, sir.
And it takes you out.
to a number now you'll see that there are two numbers one crossed out in best name or manner so you can read it that is the penultimate state of the light the red numbers that i explained is the final state this word here is vice by the way um so so you look so and then it gives you another two eight two seven now here we have the original but we use these printed versions so two eight two seven
You look up 2827.
You can even use it here.
It's wonderful.
Because this library is in constant use.
I mean, it's not in use by, on the whole, we try and keep, we don't have toggle readers under no circumstances.
That's correct.
And my job is mainly answering queries, because you see, when every bit of damage done is a bit of damage in the kind of, it makes less seamless what
is in itself, as an entity, you mean.
I know of no other library which has not been added to, which is kept exactly as it was, in which the order of the books can't be checked, because of the numbering system, you see.
But it is an absolutely practical library.
And it's not just practical.
The reason we're having a facsimile done, which is going to be published, is because, of course, the categorisation tells you a great deal about peeps of mine.
Anyway, so you then look it up, 2827, I said, wasn't it?
So you look up 2827, and this tells me that it is in case number six, and that it is, oh, about whatever it is, I can't do the mathematics, 12 books along from the left, and that it's on shelf five, which makes it a big book down at the bottom.
Okay.
Oh, that's wonderful.
I'm just drawing a little picture over here as you're over there.
So that's shelf.
Five, let's say.
Case one, two, three, four, five, six, twelve.
And then these are the numbers consecutively.
Two, seven, one, one,
82731.
Brilliant.